- Welcome to another episode
of Falsehoods of Fitness.
We're gonna talk about
training range of motion today.
Give it a couple of minutes
for everybody to show up.
Did everybody see my new X3 cup?
It says, "Beyond".
It's got a pair of superheroes.
Notice the gentleman has no hair.
That was my idea.
So...
Okay.
We'll wait for...
What we got?
We've got quite a few on Instagram.
Instagram must be just
easier to jump in and out of
for most people.
So I'll just give a brief
on what we're gonna be talking about,
and then we'll sort of
officially start it.
Gregory, hey. How you doing?
So what we're...
What we keep running into
in comments and questions is
range of motion.
Isn't it true that, if you
train one range of motion,
that you only get stronger
in that one position
and not in other positions?
There's a couple different
ways to answer that.
Clearly that's a violation of
principles of human physiology
because you don't use
all ranges of motion,
even when you lift or
when you do anything,
but that's what we're gonna talk about,
and then I'll talk about some research
and then practical applications.
So what we're gonna be talking about
has been well documented
in one particular powerful study,
which is authored by a guy I worked with
when I was youth science
officer at Powerplay.
a guy named Swapan Mukherjee.
He's the department head
at a university in Ohio.
Kinesiology department head.
God, the name of the
university's just escaping me
at the moment, but, like, smartest guy
when it comes to exercise physiology.
Just the best guy to hang out with.
So I'll be reviewing that
and then talking about the strength curve.
You'll probably see
over the top of my head,
I've got a couple of graphics.
I realize that wouldn't
show up on the cameras,
so Chelsea was nice enough
so I could do it on paper
so you guys could see
much better in the camera.
All right.
- [Chelsea] Robert says hello.
- Robert does?
- Mm-hm.
Robert. Yeah, hey, Robert, how you doing?
All right.
So let's jump into it.
Now...
When you train a specific range of motion,
is the adaptation only
in that range of motion?
Okay, just from, like, biology,
you know, high school,
you know that the length of
a cell, of a muscle cell,
runs the entire length of the muscle,
and so when a cell is
activated, it's activated.
It's just a matter of
how short that cell gets.
There's actin and myosin,
the two types of filaments
inside these cells,
and they come together or they don't,
and the amount of those microfilaments
that come together is the
shortening of the muscle.
So, you know, when I contract
my bicep, it's short.
It's long here.
So, like, they're shortening,
but it's not like
I'm not engaging the muscle
when it's in its lengthened
position or whatever.
What we need to look at is
the fact that, functionally,
I always reference the
term functional fitness
as one of the most
overused and misused terms,
but we choose to use ranges of motion
when we have to get a task done
as opposed to saying I'm
going to lift a static weight
through a given range of motion.
For example, a sprinter uses
seven degrees of flexion,
behind their knee.
You have 180 degrees of range
of motion in your inner joint,
but when you need to run
fast, you only use seven.
Why?
It's because that's the range
of motion that is efficient.
The muscle, the quadricep,
is at its shortest,
therefore you have access
to the most muscular tissue,
so you can gauge the cell
to a higher degree.
It's not really you're engaging
one little part of the muscle
and it's different parts of the muscle
when the muscle's shorter.
It's the same muscle that's engaging.
It's just the degree of engagement
that happens in that
stronger range of motion.
So you see sprinters,
and the idea that a sprinter's
only getting stronger
in that seven degrees of motion.
If that were true, then a
sprinter wouldn't be able
to get out of a chair very well
because, when their knee is at 90 degrees
when you're sitting at a chair
and you get up out of the chair,
you have no strength, right?
Oh, but they're incredibly
strong in all ranges of motion,
so it completely translates
as long as the stronger range is fatigued,
which is why sprinters have
such powerful leg strength,
and I can't say this about all sprinters,
but typically, sprinters don't squat
because they don't want
to fire those muscles
in a different pattern.
They want to train.
They do drills, they do
high knees and stuff,
but that has to do with flexibility.
That doesn't have to do
with firing the muscle.
That's another thing we get.
They do it with high knees.
That's not a strengthening event,
that's a range of motion,
stretching type of activity,
Based on...
Well, first, to dispel
that myth completely,
there's a 1999 study
by Swapan Mukherjee,
the guy I mentioned earlier,
and one of his students, Nick Raverness,
and Mukherjee and Raverness in 1999
did a fixed bench press joint angle,
so they're bench pressing
just in a very short range of motion.
What they did is they had people training
in just this short range of motion,
very short repetitions,
and they tried to get it
to where they do a failure
in just this range of motion,
and then they would go
back to full-range training
to do a post test after
a certain period of time,
I don't remember how many weeks it was,
of this strong-range-only training.
What they determined
was that these individuals
got incredibly strong,
even in ranges of motion they never used.
Doesn't that make sense?
Because they were fatiguing
the entire muscle.
Now, that's not the whole story,
because what they're really getting
is a myofibril effect,
so a density of cell
as opposed to a volume of cell,
so that would be a more strength
versus mass kind of effect,
even though it's never
quite as one or the other.
There's a lot of one and a
little of the other sometimes
and the same vice versa.
So what's important to point out
is that we have a strength curve,
so I want you to see the top image,
and this is what we see, strength curves,
When... Look at the top image first.
So when we're in our
weaker range of motion,
we are capable of a
small amount of weight,
1/7th what we are in the
stronger range of motion, right?
But it's not linear.
There's a steep curve.
Like, we're real powerful out here,
and down here, way less powerful,
and then, down here,
way less than even that.
It's not like we want to
necessarily
look at it in a linear fashion.
It's just not.
And the bone density research
really proves this out here,
so how do we get
really heavy loads
in this range of motion,
and then lighter loads.
And the reason we want
a variance in the loads
is to trigger both types
of muscular growth.
So phase one of fatigue,
when you do an X3 session,
has to do with that full range.
Like, I'm firing the whole muscle,
the whole tricep, the whole
pectoral, the whole deltoid,
and I'm going to fatigue where
everything is most powerful,
where I'm capable of delivering
the most amount of force.
So that shows a structural deficit
to the central nervous system,
hence a structural adaptation.
More myofibril growth, very
aggressive protein synthesis,
which means the muscles
becomes more dense,
and that's a very high
power-to-weight ratio muscle.
Then, as you go to the
phase two type of fatigue,
when you can't get to
the strong range anymore
and you're doing a shorter range.
Like, I'm just going from here to here,
so let's say I've got 100
pounds here and 300 pounds here,
so I'm doing a shorter
repetition, let's call it a half,
but, you know, it's anywhere in there,
in that sort of middle space,
so now
what am I fatiguing?
It's not the structure of the muscle
because we already did that,
which is why I can't get
full extension anymore.
Now we're running out of ATP, glycogen,
and creatine phosphate.
We're running out of the fuels,
and fuel fatigue is a different
type of muscular fatigue.
Now, when your central nervous system sees
that you evacuate the fuels
in the cell very quickly.
It's an irritant. All
exercise is an irritant.
I really like using that word
because it...
It accurately
tells the story of the fact
that there's a point to where
certain tissues in the body
are really shutting down.
That process,
the fuel load and storage within the cell,
becomes irritated
because you're out of it,
and then you begin to go to fatigue
in the weaker ranges of motion
even holding the lighter weight,
which is very easy on the joints,
but it's a deeper level of fatigue,
so you're getting both
the absolute maximum myofibril stimulus
in that phase one,
and then that phase two
is the diminishing range
that you're getting.
I did an infographic.
In fact, some of you will
probably post it in the comments.
An infographic showing
the diminishing range
of why, why we do that,
and it's super powerful.
That's also why we do one set
with slightly higher repetitions.
That brings me to the second
part of this graphic right here
which has to do with the strength curve.
This is the same curve,
and we didn't draw it
all the way up to 7X,
so just the 5X,
because the reason
that the latex that people use with X3
is, let's say 5X at extension,
is because you really want to make sure
that you're not denying this curve.
And this is also why we do
higher repetitions with X3,
because you are so powerful in
the stronger range of motion.
And just from a bone density perspective,
those momentary,
just, engagements that are just isolated,
like, for example, when I
push with my upper extremities
to stimulate bone growth,
at Osteostrong, I can put
4000 pounds through my legs.
Well, I'm not going to put 4000 pounds
through my legs with X3
or any other type of method.
Like, that's why Osteostrong
is so powerful for bone,
but, from a muscular standpoint,
I want to fatigue that
stronger range of motion
with multiple repetitions,
and I don't want to get
stuck not being able
to manage my way through these midpoints,
which are quite a bit
weaker than the strong.
So first you go to a fatigue in the strong
because this is linear,
the latex is linear,
but you're not, but you
do higher repetitions
and you end up working your way down that,
that curve with those large repetitions
because you make sure that
you get to that fatigue there,
and you're still using a weight
that's in your capability range
throughout this whole curve,
so when somebody says,
"Yeah, I got the Elite band
"and my workout's only like five reps."
No, it's like, no. Don't do it like that.
You're not going to get great results.
You'll get some myofibril probably,
but you won't get the size
that you're looking for.
You'll just get the power.
Let's really focus on getting both.
You want to have both.
That's really the focus
of today's Falsehoods of Fitness.
Yeah, so don't let anybody
tell you, you know,
"Oh, the range of motion is lighter."
One of my favorite examples is
somebody says, "Well, you
know, you don't go full range,
"don't touch the bar to your
chest in the bench press,"
'cause they're competing in
the sport in the bench press,
and I go, "Yeah, that's great.
"What about guys who bench with dumbbells?
"'Cause they can go down even further
"'cause they don't have
the bar in their way.
"Are they doing a real bench press?
"Like, what does real mean?"
So for those who aren't so
involved in the sport
of a movement...
Now, there's nothing wrong with that.
In fact, there's a lot of extra
users that are using the X3
as their sort of finishing set
when they do the regular workout,
so they are still practicing
the sport of their movement.
'Cause keep in mind,
whether it's bench presses
or Crossfit movements,
these are skills as well as power outputs,
so they gotta keep that skill alive
and keep in that movement pattern.
They have to fire those
muscles in that right order.
So, like, a baseball
pitcher doesn't decide,
"Oh, I'm just going to bench
press in the off-season.
"I'm not going to throw a ball."
Mm-mm. No.
Don't do that 'cause you screw that up.
The same kind of thing, but
you don't want to get
your training stimulus
confused with what your sport is.
So you can have a particular
thing that you do,
but you can also train in
a certain way to optimize
that thing you do and get
more results out of it.
I think that concludes.
Time's a little short.
We've got a bunch of things
we gotta get done today.